MFLT-10709 Document linux changes in release 1.5 (#525)
memfault/memfault-docs: docs/linux/metrics.mdx

## Introduction

A key feature of the Memfault SDK is the ability to capture metrics on device,

> aggregate them in regular heartbeats messages and upload them to the Memfault

Author: ```suggestion
aggregate them in regular heartbeats messages, and upload them to the Memfault
```

Memfault terminology related to metrics and to learn how the features you'll set
up here can be accessed in the Memfault Web App.

### Architecture

The Memfault SDK leverages [CollectD][collectd-homepage] to capture metrics from

> the system. All metrics are sent by CollectD to the `memfaultd` daemon running

Reviewer: ```suggestion
the system. All metrics are sent by collectd to the `memfaultd` daemon running
```

Author: Why? 

I think we generally write "CollectD" when naming it and `collectd` when talking of the binary itself.

Reviewer: But nowhere in the [collectd docs](https://collectd.org/) do they write it like that.

> the system. All metrics are sent by CollectD to the `memfaultd` daemon running
> on the device via a local HTTP push.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
the system. All metrics are sent by collectd to the local HTTP server which the `memfaultd` daemon is running on the device.
```

Makes it a bit more clear which side is running the server.

This architecture has the following advantages:

- Metrics are captured by a well-known and widely used tool. A wide set of
  plugins are available.
- You can easily push your own metrics using one of the multiple input plugins

>   for CollectD (including StatsD which we recommend).

Reviewer: ```suggestion
  for collectd (including StatsD, which we recommend).
```

- Metrics are aggregated in memory and sent to the Memfault backend in a single
  heartbeat message. This reduces the number of messages sent to the backend and
  reduces the load on the device.
- During a network outage, metrics are written to disk (or to a volatile storage
  if [the `tmp_storage` is configured to point to a

>   `tmpfs`][docs-config-storage]) and you have precise control on how much space

Author: ```suggestion
  `tmpfs`][docs-config-storage]), and you have precise control on how much space
```

>   is used by your diagnostic data.

Author: yes!

- Memfault [fleet sampling][docs-fleet-sampling] can be used to enable or
  disable metrics captures remotely.
- Until the user opts-in for data collection, all data is dropped and never
  written to disk or network.

## Prerequisites

### The `memfaultd` daemon

Follow the [integration guide][docs-linux-integration] to learn how to set this
up for your device. You will need [the `collectd` feature
enabled][docs-linux-control-features] to use `collectd` with Memfault.

> ### CollectD

Reviewer: ```suggestion
### collectd
```

(and more below too)

CollectD is a lightweight daemon that collects system and application metrics.
It is widely used in the Linux ecosystem and has a large number of plugins
available to collect metrics from a variety of sources.

The `collectd` feature of `memfaultd` enables a CollectD-compatible HTTP
endpoint. This endpoint will receive metrics pushed by the CollectD daemon at

> any frequency and aggregate them (in memory) into heartbeats payload sent to the
> server.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
any frequency. `memfaultd` aggregates the metrics (in memory) into heartbeats and sends them to the
Memfault cloud.
```

In addition to standard metrics captured by CollectD, you can capture custom
metrics from your application using the StatsD protocol to CollectD.

To use CollectD with Memfault, we will configure CollectD to send metrics to
`memfaultd` (over HTTP on `localhost`). This is our recommended configuration
and demonstrated in [`meta-memfault-example`][source-yocto-example].

> #### CollectD with Yocto

Author: I agree we should be consistent with their branding. I will edit all the `CollectD` to `collectd` (as also suggested strongly by martijn).

[statsd-clients]:
  https://github.com/statsd/statsd/blob/master/docs/client_implementations.md

## Configuring memfaultd

### Configure the http server

`memfaultd` exposes an HTTP server on port 8787 by default. The port must match
the port that you will define in the CollectD configuration. You can change the
port by setting the `http_port` configuration option in `/etc/memfaultd.conf`.

Metrics are expected to be sent to the `/v1/collectd` path (this is not

> configurable).

Author: Why? Why would you want to configure this?

> configurable).

Reviewer 2: I misunderstood what this was used for. You're right, there would be no use case for configuring this.

### Enable metrics collection

By default, `enable_data_collection` is `false` (see the [default
configuration][source-builtin-conf]). This is to enable asking end users for
consent before collecting or transmitting any data to Memfault services.

Once the end user has given their consent, you can enable data collection like
so:

```shell
$ memfaultctl enable-data-collection
```

To disable it:

```shell
$ memfaultctl disable-data-collection
```

The `memfaultd` service will restart automatically whenever you run either of
those commands if called with a value different from the current configuration.

Take a look at the [`/etc/memfaultd.conf` reference][docs-configuration] for
more information.

### Configure the aggregation interval

All metrics pushed by CollectD are aggregated in memory. A new heartbeat will be
generated at regular interval. The default value is 1 hour. You can change the
interval by setting the `heartbeat_interval_seconds` configuration option in
`/etc/memfaultd.conf`.

> An heartbeat is also generated when you shutdown or restart `memfaultd` and

Reviewer: ```suggestion
A heartbeat is also generated when you shutdown or restart `memfaultd` and
```

every time the `memfaultctl sync` command is used.

:::note Note

> We recommend sticking to the default value of 1 hour for the aggregation.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
We recommend using the default value of 1 hour for the aggregation.
```

> Setting `heartbeat_interval_seconds` to a low valie will result in more frequent

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Setting `heartbeat_interval_seconds` to a low value will result in more frequent
```

heartbeats that will eventually be rate-limited by Memfault's backend.

Contact us if you need to adjust this value.

:::

## Configuring collectd

We strongly recommend familiarizing yourself with [collectd][collectd-homepage]
and how it's configured in order to make the best use of the Memfault platform.

A minimal configuration file to configure collectd to post to Memfault looks
like this:

```conf
<LoadPlugin write_http>
  FlushInterval 10
</LoadPlugin>
<Plugin write_http>
  <Node "memfaultd">
    URL "http://127.0.0.1:8787/v1/collectd"
    Format "JSON"
    Metrics true
    Notifications false
    StoreRates true
    BufferSize 65536
    Timeout 10000
  </Node>
</Plugin>
```

This file configures the `write_http` plugin to send data to the `memfaultd`
daemon on localhost. By default the port 8787 is used. We also set a
`FlushInterval` of 10 seconds.

:::note Note

The `FlushInterval` is the interval at which collectd will send data to
`memfaultd`. Because `memfaultd` will re-aggregate the data in memory, a faster
frequency will **not** result in more points visible in the Memfault backend. We

> recommend anywhere between 10 and 60 seconds.

Reviewer: Why not slower?

Author: We assume that we have "recent" data when generating heartbeats (the heartbeats are time-stamped with the current system time when generating the heartbeat).

Increasing the interval will increase the error in measurement: if you set it to 10 minutes the last measurement might be sent 9min before the next heartbeat. And the heartbeat data could be off by 15% (instead of representing data from 10am to 11am, it could be 9:51 to 10:51). By keeping it to a value between 10s and 60s, you keep that error to an acceptable level.

Another factor is that if the interval is too slow, then `memfaultct request-metrics` might not have any metrics.

Reviewer: Maybe add a short version of that here? I think I won't be the last one to wonder about that.
